Grant David Meadors
02015-11-17 (JD 2457344)
Recollections of the event

EDITED VERSION, 17 November 2015

Monday, 14 September 2015:

O1, the first Advanced LIGO observing run: for long years, the letters gleamed like glyphs from the future -- this week, it starts.
Charts and checklists Megaparsecs-long are ended.
My work here at AEI Hannover is calm compared to the buzz palpable in the online logbooks and in the voices down the hall. 
If we can see continuous gravitational waves from Scorpius X-1, then their trace will steadily build, perhaps discernible by winter.
Yet those at the observatories and in the depths of the instrument must make their machines work all at once.
Hectic days and sleepless nights!
Millions of meters away, all I perceive is the quiet.
I
Tuesday, 15 September 2015:

"Dear Group", begins our director's email: we LIGO members are having special meeting.
Maybe, I wonder, someone put in a blind injection.
Big Dog came almost exactly five years ago, while I was a visitor at Hanford Observatory.
We had rushed to measure the detector, to calibrate it threefold ways, to know whether that signal from Canis Major might be real.
All was to be torn apart, so we had to hurry to make way for the future -- today's future.
Then we waited six months to learn whether Big Dog was from the stars or ourselves.
It was, as most had guess, the latter.
What a strange decision to have a blind injection now!
Maybe I am too suspicious; maybe today is just a briefing.

Thirty or more scientists crowd into a room.
Some sit with laptops open.
I stand by a pillar.
Our director enters, locking the door.
"Should we close the blinds", I ask, semi-seriously.
"Actually, that's a good idea", he replies, "There are a lot of people here for the conference".
Blinds fell.
The projected beamed a LIGO wiki page onto the way.
"This is not a blind injection".

Waves of information fill the room.
Amidst doubts, a sense of history tempts me to believe.
The plot unfolds like the opening of a thriller.
Questions: where is it from, what do we call it.
"The Hydra's Head?"
And what is the false alarm probability?
At last these words have gravity.
For the first time, perhaps gravity has a voice.

Saturday, 19 September 2015:

Fireworks burst over Herrenhaeuser Garten on my walk home.
I am lured by the spectacle.
On Thursday my impulse was to archive the data, offline, just in case.
On Friday, I wanted to listen to the sound of the merging black holes myself.
My friends and colleagues and I had sat down, playing that little thunderclap again, amplifying and stretching it to hear it better. 
Only today, though, when I looked at the Event log, did my fears begin to abate.
All hardware channels checked, it said; our injections, indeed, were not ready.
As fireworks light my way home, I let myself start to think The Event is real.


ORIGINAL VERSION, 22 September 2015

Monday, 14 September 2015 (as told 22 September 2015)

Who knew life in Germany would be so hectic? 
Everyone has been talking about O1, the first Advanced LIGO observing run, since I got here eight months ago.
Indeed, since long before.
Here we are; the date has slipped a day from tomorrow to the end of the week, but it is about to start.
I am less nervous than most.
My work here at AEI Hannover is on continuous waves, the kind of searches that look for neutron stars slowly, steadily radiating out gravitational waves.
Our analyses do not really begin until all the data is in -- and that will not be until the run ends around the same time the year does.
But when it starts, that starts a ticking clock: three months to finish my lingering study of S6 data, from the sixth and final run of Initial LIGO.
It will soon be boring, but it is the legacy of my thesis: I want it published so all that work does not go to waste, before it is made obsolete by someone, probably me, doing something almost identical with the new data.
And that is why my life still feels hectic.
Two collaborators are here.
There's an offer on the table to travel.
I have to renew my passport.
And the previous renter in my apartment is getting scary letters.
So much to do!
There's no time for anything new or interesting.
Space is calling out to us?
Well then quiet it down and tell it to come back next year! 
We're not ready -- I'm not ready -- and the to-do list is a Megaparsec long.

Tuesday, 15 September 2015 (as told 22 September 2015):

An email: it's our director.
"Dear Group", it begins. 
It says that we are having a special meeting -- LSC members only.
Oh, dear.
I hope that it's just a briefing on the start of O1, but what if someone put in a blind injection?
A blind injection just like the Big Dog, the injection that came in September 2010 at the end of S6.
When that simulated signal came -- quickly pinpointed to a "banana island" region on the sky centered on the constellation Canis Major, hence the name -- most people suspected pretty quickly that it was simulated, injected into LIGO to test our searches' sensitivity.
There was a lot of fuss.
I was at Hanford Observatory at the time.
We check the calibration three different ways, urgently; the instrument was going to be ripped apart to make way for Advanced LIGO.
But we checked anyway.
And for a moment there at the next conference, in Arcadia, California -- was that town to live up to its name? -- it felt like we about to enter a new era in history.
Most everything checked out, the parameters looked good, at least to a novice like me.
But there was only one way of telling whether it was real or not: to open the envelop and see if it was a blind injection.
So we waited anxiously as we can to the presentation that would reveal all.
Boldly, we waited for the answer: we voted to send it to Physical Review Letters if it were real.
Then came the slide: "Envelop", it said, missing an "e" at the end.
And inside... the parameters people had estimated, with a few discrepancies that later turned out to be a bug -- in the injection code.
The parameters came from the simulation.
It wasn't real.
And so Advanced LIGO was built, knowing Initial LIGO never saw anything, yet with confidence that sometime -- maybe by the end of the decade, we finally would.

So I went up to the appointed meeting this day in 2015.
All the seats were taken, so I stood by a pillar.
Our director came in and closed and locked the door, about thirty of us there, a few with laptops open.
"Should we close the blinds?" I asked, semi-seriously.
This was a secret meeting, after all, and our LSC spokesperson had just emphasized our need for secrecy; whether ultimately necessary or not, we might as well adhere to policy.
"Actually, that's a good idea", he said, "there are a lot of people here for the conference".
Ah, the conference downstairs -- the one about LISA, the space interferometer to complement LIGO, and whether it might be possible to build a third arm for it.
People lowered the blinds and closed the windows.
Laptops were connected to the projector.
I stood leaning on the pillar, staring right at the view.
It was a wiki page, one of many in LIGO, but this one was different.
"This is not a blind injection".


Wave of information, sense of history, like being at the beginning of an action thriller.
Simultaneously, sense of being on the outside.
What to call it -- lots of uncertainty where it came from, but most likely from near the head of the constellation Hydra. 
How about "Hydra's Head"?
Hmm, I am not sure I like all the associations: not the friendliest of mythical beasts, nor of supervillain organizations.


Wednesday, 16 September 2015 (as told 22 September 2015):

Thursday, 17 September 2015 (as told 22 September 2015):

We should check the data.
Save all the data -- offline.
Just in case.

Friday, 18 September 2015 (as told 22 September 2015):

O1 begins.
We listened to the sounds.

Saturday, 19 September 2015 (as told 22 September 2015):

On the Event log, all the hardware injection channels checked.
They look good, and our hardware injections were not ready.
If this were faked, it would have had to have been done in software -- and by somebody really good.
I am starting to believe it is real.
Walked home to fireworks.

